# chargemol

Important: Go to Mailing Lists and sign up for ddec-news. This is the only way for us to directly contact you when an updated version is posted.

This program performs atomic population analysis to determine DDEC net atomic charges, atomic spin moments, and bond orders. Because the DDEC net atomic charges are simultaneously optimized to reproduce atomic chemical states and the electrostatic potential surrounding a material, they are well-suited for constructing force-fields used in atomistic simulations (e.g., classical molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo simulations) and for quantifying electron transfer between atoms in complex materials and during chemical reactions.

The program analyzes electron and spin density distributions generated by a quantum chemistry (e.g., DFT, coupled-cluster, etc.) calculation performed with a software such as VASP, Gaussian 09, CP2K, GPAW, SIESTA, ONETEP, etc.

The program is written in Fortran and parallelized using OpenMP. The program can be run in serial (one-processor) or parallel (multi-processor) modes. It runs on Linux and Windows operating systems.

Installation and usage instructions are in the instructions_09_26_2017.pdf file of the chargemol_09_26_2017.zip archive.

## Publications

The DDEC method is described in the following publications:

- T. A. Manz, "Introducing DDEC6 atomic population analysis: part 3. Comprehensive method to compute bond orders," RSC Advances, Vol. 7 (2017) 45552-45581.
- N. Gabaldon Limas and T. A. Manz,  "Introducing DDEC6 atomic population analysis: part 2. Computed results for a wide range of periodic and nonperiodic materials," RSC Advances, Vol. 6 (2016) 45727-45747.
- T. A. Manz and N. Gabaldon Limas, "Introducing DDEC6 atomic population analysis: part 1. Charge partitioning theory and methodology," RSC Advances, Vol. 6 (2016) 47771-47801.
- Thomas A. Manz and David S. Sholl, "Improved Atoms-in-Molecule Charge Partitioning Functional for Simultaneously Reproducing the Electrostatic Potential and Chemical States in Periodic and Non-Periodic Materials", J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 8 (2012) 2844-2867.
- Thomas A. Manz and David S. Sholl, "Methods for Computing Accurate Atomic Spin Moments for Collinear and Noncollinear Magnetism in Periodic and Nonperiodic Materials", J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 7 (2011) 4146-4164.
- Thomas A. Manz and David S. Sholl, "Chemically Meaningful Atomic Charges that Reproduce the Electrostatic Potential in Periodic and Nonperiodic Materials", J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 6 (2010) 2455-2468.

In addition, publications are in preparation for describing the OpenMP parallelization and other recent additions to the program.

## License information

This software is distributed under the license described below, which is compliant with the Open Source Initiative found at http://www.opensource.org/docs/osd. You are not licensed to use or modify this software unless you agree to all of the licensing terms below:

1. Derived Works and Integrity of The Author’s Source Code: Derived works must be distributed under exactly the same terms as this license. **The source code is restricted from being distributed in modified form; however, this license allows the distribution of "patch files" with the source code for the purpose of modifying the program at build time.**
2. Free Redistribution: The license does not restrict any party from selling or giving away the software as a component of an aggregate software distribution containing programs from several different sources. The license does not require a royalty or other fee for such a sale. This license does not restrict other software that may be distributed along with the licensed software.
3. Source Code: The program includes source code, and allows distribution in source code as well as compiled form. (Deliberately obfuscated source code and intermediate forms such as the output of a preprocessor or translator are not allowed.)
4. Distribution of License: The rights attached to the program apply to all to whom the program is redistributed without the need for execution of an additional license by those parties.
5. Scientific publications that use computational results of the program are required to properly cite the original research papers describing the methods used in the program, according to best scientific practice.  *Note:* For the current software version, this would include citation of the following papers:
  1. for the calculation of DDEC6 atomic charges, please cite:
   - T. A. Manz and N. Gabaldon Limas, "[Introducing DDEC6 atomic population analysis: part 1. Charge partitioning theory and methodology,](https://doi.org/10.1039/c6ra04656h)" RSC Adv., 6 (2016) 47771-47801.
   - N. Gabaldon Limas and T. A. Manz, "[Introducing DDEC6 atomic population analysis: part 2. Computed results for a wide range of periodic and nonperiodic materials,](https://doi.org/10.1039/C6RA05507A)" RSC Adv., 6 (2016) 45727-45747. If desired, you can also cite references listed below for the DDEC3 and earlier methods.
  2. for the calculation of DDEC3 atomic charges, please cite:
    - T. A. Manz and D. S. Sholl, “[Improved Atoms-in-Molecule Charge Partitioning Functional for Simultaneously Reproducing the Electrostatic Potential and Chemical States in Periodic and Non-Periodic Materials,](https://doi.org/10.1021/ct3002199)” J. Chem. Theory Comput. 8 (2012) 2844-2867.
    - T. A. Manz and D. S. Sholl, “[Chemically Meaningful Atomic Charges that Reproduce the Electrostatic Potential in Periodic and Nonperiodic Materials,](https://doi.org/10.1021/ct100125x)” J. Chem. Theory Comput. 6 (2010) 2455- 2468.
  3. for the calculation of RMSE and RRMSE, please cite:
    - T. A. Manz and D. S. Sholl, “[Improved Atoms- in-Molecule Charge Partitioning Functional for Simultaneously Reproducing the Electrostatic Potential and Chemical States in Periodic and Non-Periodic Materials,](https://doi.org/10.1021/ct3002199)” J. Chem. Theory Comput. 8 (2012) 2844-
2867.
    - T. Watanabe, T. A. Manz, and D. S. Sholl, “[Accurate Treatment of Electrostatics during Molecular Adsorption in Nanoporous Crystals without Assigning Point Charges to Framework Atoms,](https://doi.org/10.1021/jp201075u)” J.  Phys. Chem. C, 115 (2011) 4824 – 4836.
  4. for the calculation of atomic spin moments, please cite: T. A. Manz and D. S. Sholl, “[Methods for Computing Accurate Atomic Spin Moments for Collinear and Noncollinear Magnetism in Periodic and Nonperiodic Materials,](https://doi.org/10.1021/ct200539n)” J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7 (2011) 4146-4164.
  5. for the calculation of bond orders, please cite: T. A. Manz, “[Introducing DDEC6 atomic population analysis: part 3. Comprehensive method to compute bond orders,](https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ra07400j)” RSC Adv., 7 (2017) 45552-45581.
6. In addition to the scientific papers described in # 5 above, please cite this software program as following: T. A. Manz and N. Gabaldon Limas, Chargemol program for performing DDEC analysis, Version 3.5, 2017, ddec.sourceforge.net.
7. This license makes no discrimination against persons or groups or fields of endeavor. The rights attached to this program do not depend on the program’s being part of a particular software distribution. No provision of this license is predicated on any particular style of interface.
